# Context, Features and Priorities

This document provides instructions for a mandatory computer lab session in the course ETSN15 "Requirements Engineering" given at Lund University. The source code of this page in markdown is available [here](https://github.com/reqT/reqT/blob/3.0.x/doc/lab1/lab1-2019.md).

## Goals

To complete this lab you should develop a requirements model using [reqT](http://reqt.org/download.html). Your requirements model should be based on your course project and it should include the following sections:

  * A **context** section including a draft product context of your course project with some relevant interfaces to some relevant actors. The model does not have to be complete.

  * A **features** section with at least 5 high-level features from your course project, each with a descriptive id. Each feature should also have a Gist attribute with a short description of the feature.

  * A **priorities** section with priorities for each feature based on the criteria: *which feature is most important to spend more elicitation effort on*.


## Task 0: Mandatory Preparations

* Draw an initial version of a context diagram for your project using some drawing tool, e.g. *LibreOffice Draw*, or take a photo of a hand drawing, and save it as `.png` or `.jpg` or `.svg`

* Select around 5 to 10 high-level features from your project and for each feature create a short description of one line of text.

* Name at least 2 stakeholders from your project.

* Make sure you can run reqT in terminal and launch the swing desktop gui using the `edit` command.

    * How to start reqT on the student Linux computers in the E building at LTH: [http://cs.lth.se/krav/reqt](http://cs.lth.se/krav/reqt)

    * How to download and run reqT on your own machine: [http://reqt.org/download.html](http://reqt.org/download.html)

* Study the slides of lectures [L1-L4](http://cs.lth.se/krav/lectures/), and the [reqT tutorial](http://fileadmin.cs.lth.se/krav/reqT-tutorial.pdf).

* At the begining of the lab session be prepared to:

    * Show your context diagram and a list of your feature with one-line descriptions and stakeholders.

    * Answer these questions:

        * What are the differences between an entity and an attribute?

        * What can be connected with a relation?

## Task 1: Create a `context` section

* Launch reqT and open the swing desktop gui editor with the `edit` command in terminal.

* Create a textual model of your project context diagram from your lab preparatins in Task 0 above, using reqT. Use entities in a similar way as in the example below.

```
Section context
  Product hotelApp interactsWith
    User receptionist
    User guest
    System accounting
    System telephony  
```

* Save your reqT model.

* Export your reqT model as html.

* (Optional.) If you are on a machine with Graphviz installed (e.g. LTH computers in the E building), generate a GraphViz diagram by choosing *"To Graphviz .dot nested"* in the **Export** menu.

* (Optional.) Study the template *"Context diagram with interfaces"* in the **Templates** menu and make a more detailed context diagram of your project including a model of interfaces with input/output data.

## Task 2: Create a `features` section  

* Add a `Section("features")` to your model and include your feature according to the following example. Each feature should have a short identifier (id) that use camel case capitalization. Place your feature description in a `Gist` attribute. If you type `Gist ?` in the reqT terminal you can see an explanation/definition of what a `Gist` attribute is.

```
Section features
  Feature checkIn
    Gist Guests can be checked in upon arrival.
  Feature checkOut
    Gist Guests can be checked out after paying and leaving.
  Feature groupCheckIn
    Gist Many guest arriving simultaneously can be checked in as a group.
  Feature roomSearch
    Gist Receptionists can find available rooms based on search criteria.
  Feature webBooking
    Gist A guest can book a future stay via a web interface.
```

## Task 3: Prioritize your features

* Ordinal-scale prioritization: parwise comparison

    * Select your features section in the Tree pane and choose *Prioritize: compare entities* in the **Tools** menu. You should get a list of id pairs for all combinations of sub-entities of the features section loaded into the editor.

    * Change all diamonds `<>` to either `<` or `>` depending on your prioritization of the features according to this crietria for each pair of features A and B:

        * *A is more/less important to spend more elicitation effort on than B*.

    * Choose *"Proiritize: analyse comparisions"* in the **Tools** menu. You should get a model with priorities calculated as a solution to a constraint problem based on your comparisons. A higher prio value means higher priority (more important). Write down reflections on the result:

        * Are the priorities reflecting your gut feeling of "importance" according to the prioritization criteria?

        * Were there any circular contradictions among your comparisons? This is shown as a warning in the reqT terminal.

        * Circular contradictions make the constraint problem inconsistent and thus unsolvable, but the constraint solver in reqT does not give up! Instead a *relaxed deviation* `d` is allowed starting with `d = 1` and the retrying with `d += 1` until a solution can be found. This means that each priority rank `r` is representing any value within an error margin `[r - d, r + d]`.

        * If you had no inconsistencies when solving the constraint problem, then introduce some circular consistency among 3 features just to test what happens.

        * Given the minimum relaxed deviation needed for a solution to exist with your contradictory comparisons: find some features in your resulting priority rank order that could have be swapped and still fulfill the constraints if the deviation `d` is allowed.

        * Is it easy to be consistent? Discuss the difficulty of making consistent pairwise comparisons as the number of compared objects increase. Discuss if or how the risk of being consistent might depend on the prioritization criteria. Could/should the level of deviation be used as an indicator of the quality of the human judgment?

* Ratio-scale prioritization: the 100-dollar method

    * Choose the template *"Prioritization 100$ method"* from the **Templates** menu. Study the code and try to figure out what it does. Explain how the benefits values of each stakeholder are weighted together to normalized total benefit values. See what happens when you select the Tree root and press `Ctrl+Shift-I` or choose  *"Insert Scala model from Editor after node"* from the **Tree** menu.   

    * Adapt the script from the previous step to include fake estimations of benefits of features from your project from the viewpoint of two different stakeholders. Then insert a section with weighted benefits into your tree.

## Task 4 (Optional): Publish your model on the web

* Do this optional task if you still have time left at the lab session.

* Save your model as a web page.

    * You can generate html and save a web page of your model in the **Tree** pane using the menu **Export** and choosing *"To Html"*.

    * You can generate html and save a web page of your model in the tree using this command in the `reqT` terminal: `currentTree.toHtml.save("index.html")`

* If you have an account on the student Linux computers in the E building at LTH, you can publish web pages if you create a folder called `public_html`. You can put `.html` files there for example called `index.html` inside that directory. Everyone can then access your page by surfing to ```http://users.student.lth.se/user/index.html``` where `user` is replaced with your login StilID. Here is a minimal `index.html` page:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <title>Test</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    Hello Wörld!
  </body>
</html>
```

* Include an `Image` attribute in your reqt model similar to `  Image("http://adress.to.your/page/ctx.jpg")` with a link to your context diagram drawing from Task 1, and reqT will then insert that link  in your html code when you export to html.

* Publish your context diagram image together with your illustrated model on the web. Your image file should be placed next to your html file in the `public_html` folder.


## Task 5 (Optional): Dig deeper into reqT

* Follow the old, more technically focused, lab instructions from 2017 and learn more about how you can manipulate and analyze reqT models using scripts in Scala. The old lab instructions are available here:
   [https://github.com/reqT/reqT/blob/3.0.x/doc/lab1/lab1.pdf](https://github.com/reqT/reqT/blob/3.0.x/doc/lab1/lab1.pdf)
